README.md, before:

# Boogie friends

A collection of tools for interacting with Boogie and related languages.

## Emacs package (`boogie-mode`, `dafny-mode`)

The `boogie-friends` package is an experimental collection of Emacs modes for
writing verified programs in languages of the Boogie family. Dafny and Boogie
are the two currently supported languages. Features include:

* Syntax highlighting
* Real-time compilation (using `flycheck`)
* Completion (using `company`)
* Code folding (using `hideshow`)
* Prettification (using `prettify-symbols-mode`)

In addition, the Dafny mode offers:

* (A few) Snippets (using `yasnippet`)
* (Some) In-Emacs documentation
* (Experimental) Navigation between Dafny and Boogie source files
* (Some support for) indentation
* (Some support for) jumping to a definition

### Some pictures:

#### A Dafny buffer

![Dafny buffer in Emacs](emacs/pictures/dafny-overview.png)

Notice the error highlighting, the symbol beautification (`forall` appears as `∀`), and the code folding on the last line!

#### A Boogie buffer

![Boogie buffer in Emacs](emacs/pictures/boogie-overview.png)

#### Completion and snippets

![Completion in Boogie](emacs/pictures/boogie-completion.png)
![Completion in Dafny](emacs/pictures/dafny-completion.png)
![Snippets](emacs/pictures/dafny-snippets.png)

#### Documentation (Dafny only)

![Dafny docs](emacs/pictures/dafny-docs.png)

#### Browsing the Boogie translation of a Dafny file

![Dafny buffer in Emacs](emacs/pictures/dafny-to-boogie.png)

### Setup

#### Automatic

1. Setup [MELPA](http://melpa.org/#/getting-started)

    In your `.emacs`, add these three lines if you don't have them yet:

    ```elisp
    (require 'package) ;; You might already have this line
    (add-to-list 'package-archives '("melpa" . "http://melpa.org/packages/") t)
    (package-initialize) ;; You might already have this line
    ```

2. Install the package: `M-x package-install RET boogie-friends RET`

3. Indicate the paths to your Dafny and Boogie installations:

    In your `.emacs`:

    ```elisp
    (setq flycheck-dafny-executable "PATH-TO-DAFNY")
    (setq flycheck-boogie-executable "PATH-TO-BOOGIE")
    ```

### Keybindings

#### All modes

* <kbd>C-c C-c</kbd> re-verifies the current file. With a prefix argument (<kbd>C-u C-c C-c</kbd>), extra arguments are sent to the verifier (by default `/z3opts:TRACE`).
* <kbd>S-TAB</kbd> manually cycles through reasonable indentation levels.

#### Dafny mode

* <kbd>TAB</kbd> auto-indents.
* <kbd>C-c C-?</kbd> opens the Dafny docs.
* <kbd>&lt;C-down-mouse-1></kbd> looks for the definition of the function under point in open buffers.
* <kbd>C-c C-a</kbd> translates the current file to Boogie and shows the translated file.
* <kbd>C-c C-j</kbd> or <kbd>C-S-down-mouse-1</kbd> (aka <kbd>Ctrl-Shift-Click</kbd>) jumps to the Boogie line matching the current Dafny line.

* After inserting a snippet, <kbd>TAB</kbd> moves to the next snippet field, and <kbd>C-d</kbd> removes the current field entirely.
* During completion, <kbd>C-h</kbd> shows documentation for the current snippet, if available.

### Tips

#### General

* Completion, indentation, snippets, syntax coloring, and real-time verification should work out of the box.
* Verification happens as you type, and its status is shows in the mode line (`FlyC*`: busy; `FlyC:a/b`: done).

#### Real-time error highlighting

Real-time error highlighting is enabled by default for all languages. You can disable it:

* For just one language (say Dafny) by adding `(setq flycheck-disabled-checkers '(dafny))` to your `.emacs`.

* Entirely by adding `(flycheck-mode -1)` to `'boogie-friends-mode-hook`.

#### Font support

If you see blocks instead of proper characters, or tall characters, or ugly characters:

1. Install a good font and restart Emacs (Arial Unicode, Cambria, Segoe UI Symbol, DejaVu Sans Mono, FreeMono, STIX, Unifont and [Symbola](http://users.teilar.gr/~g1951d/Symbola.zip) should all work).

2. If that doesn't fix it, setup font fallback by adding the following to your `.emacs` (replace `"Symbola"` by the name of your font):
    ```elisp
    (set-fontset-font t 'unicode (font-spec :name "Symbola") nil 'append)
    ```

3. If that still doesn't work, turn of prettification entirely by adding the following to `setup-boogie-friends` above:
    ```elisp
    (prettify-symbols-mode -1)
    ```

If you don't like the way one particular symbol is rendered, you can adjust the font for just that one:

```elisp
(set-fontset-font t (cons ?≔ ?≔) "FreeSerif" nil 'prepend)
```

#### Custom prover configurations

Each time `boogie-friends` calls a prover, it collects arguments from four sources:

* `LANGUAGE-prover-args`, the list of arguments passed to the prover in the default configuration (i.e. `dafny-prover-args` and `boogie-prover-args`). This has pretty good defaults, and probably shouldn't be changed.

* `LANGUAGE-prover-custom-args`, a list of extra flags. This is empty by default, and is a good place to add your own flags.

 `LANGUAGE-prover-local-args`, another list of extra flags. This is empty by default, and is a good place to add per-file or per-directory flags (see below).

* `LANGUAGE-prover-alternate-args`, a list of flags added to the prover invocation when running `compile` with a prefix argument (<kbd>C-u C-c C-c</kbd>). This is a good place to add flags that you do not always need; for example `"/z3opt:TRACE=true"` (this is the default).

An example configuration might thus look like this:

```elisp
;; Don't allow assumptions
(setq dafny-prover-custom-args '("/noCheating:1"))

;; Get more debug output when verifying with C-u C-c C-c
(setq dafny-prover-alternate-args '("/proverWarnings:2" "/traceverify" "/z3opt:TRACE=true" "/trace" "/traceTimes" "/tracePOs"))
```

The `LANGUAGE-prover-local-args` is useful if a file requires specific flags: in that case you can set the `LANGUAGE-prover-local-args` [in just that file](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_node/emacs/Specifying-File-Variables.html) or [in the corresponding directory](http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_node/emacs/Directory-Variables.html).

For example, you can add the following to the top of a file:

```elisp
// -*- dafny-prover-local-args: ("/vcsMaxKeepGoingSplits:5" "/proverMemoryLimit:250") -*-
```

### Acknowledgments

The documentation that ships with this package is auto-generated from the [Dafny Quick Reference](http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/projects/dafny/reference.aspx).

### Pull requests are welcome!

Clone the repo:

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.emacs.d/lisp/ && cd ~/.emacs.d/lisp/
git clone https://github.com/boogie-org/boogie-friends
```

Then in your .emacs (in addition to the stuff above):

```elisp
(add-to-list 'load-path "~/.emacs.d/lisp/boogie-friends/emacs/")
(require 'dafny-mode)
(require 'boogie-mode)
```

Commit message:

all: Add support for collecting traces and profiles
See updated README for instructions. Note that this will only really
work well if you install the patch at https://github.com/boogie-org/boogie/pull/14

README.md, after:

# Boogie friends

A collection of tools for interacting with Boogie and related languages.

## Emacs package (`boogie-mode`, `dafny-mode`)

The `boogie-friends` package is an experimental collection of Emacs modes for
writing verified programs in languages of the Boogie family. Dafny and Boogie
are the two currently supported languages. Features include:

* Syntax highlighting
* Real-time compilation (using `flycheck`)
* Completion (using `company`)
* Code folding (using `hideshow`)
* Prettification (using `prettify-symbols-mode`)

In addition, the Dafny mode offers:

* (A few) Snippets (using `yasnippet`)
* (Some) In-Emacs documentation
* (Experimental) Navigation between Dafny and Boogie source files
* (Some support for) indentation
* (Some support for) jumping to a definition

### Some pictures:

#### A Dafny buffer

![Dafny buffer in Emacs](emacs/pictures/dafny-overview.png)

Notice the error highlighting, the symbol beautification (`forall` appears as `∀`), and the code folding on the last line!

#### A Boogie buffer

![Boogie buffer in Emacs](emacs/pictures/boogie-overview.png)

#### Completion and snippets

![Completion in Boogie](emacs/pictures/boogie-completion.png)
![Completion in Dafny](emacs/pictures/dafny-completion.png)
![Snippets](emacs/pictures/dafny-snippets.png)

#### Documentation (Dafny only)

![Dafny docs](emacs/pictures/dafny-docs.png)

#### Browsing the Boogie translation of a Dafny file

![Dafny buffer in Emacs](emacs/pictures/dafny-to-boogie.png)

### Setup

#### Automatic

1. Setup [MELPA](http://melpa.org/#/getting-started)

    In your `.emacs`, add these three lines if you don't have them yet:

    ```elisp
    (require 'package) ;; You might already have this line
    (add-to-list 'package-archives '("melpa" . "http://melpa.org/packages/") t)
    (package-initialize) ;; You might already have this line
    ```

2. Install the package: `M-x package-install RET boogie-friends RET`

3. Indicate the paths to your Dafny and Boogie installations:

    In your `.emacs`:

    ```elisp
    (setq flycheck-dafny-executable "PATH-TO-DAFNY")
    (setq flycheck-boogie-executable "PATH-TO-BOOGIE")
    (setq boogie-friends-profile-analyzer-executable "PATH-TO-Z3-AXIOM-PROFILER") ;; Optional
    ```

### Keybindings

#### All modes

* <kbd>C-c C-c</kbd> re-verifies the current file. With a prefix argument (<kbd>C-u C-c C-c</kbd>), extra arguments are sent to the verifier (by default `/trace`).
* <kbd>S-TAB</kbd> manually cycles through reasonable indentation levels.

#### Dafny and Boogie

* <kbd>C-c C-t</kbd> gets a verification trace for the current file, and parses the resulting timings.
* <kbd>C-c C-p</kbd> prompts for a method name, generates a tracing profile of that method, and launches the profile analyzer (`boogie-friends-profile-analyzer-executable`) on the resulting trace.

#### Dafny only

* <kbd>TAB</kbd> auto-indents.
* <kbd>C-c C-?</kbd> opens the Dafny docs.
* <kbd>&lt;C-down-mouse-1></kbd> looks for the definition of the function under point in open buffers.
* <kbd>C-c C-a</kbd> translates the current file to Boogie and shows the translated file.
* <kbd>C-c C-j</kbd> or <kbd>C-S-down-mouse-1</kbd> (aka <kbd>Ctrl-Shift-Click</kbd>) jumps to the Boogie line matching the current Dafny line.

* After inserting a snippet, <kbd>TAB</kbd> moves to the next snippet field, and <kbd>C-d</kbd> removes the current field entirely.
* During completion, <kbd>C-h</kbd> shows documentation for the current snippet, if available.

### Tips

#### General

* Completion, indentation, snippets, syntax coloring, and real-time verification should work out of the box.
* Verification happens as you type, and its status is shows in the mode line (`FlyC*`: busy; `FlyC:a/b`: done).

#### Real-time error highlighting

Real-time error highlighting is enabled by default for all languages. You can disable it:

* For just one language (say Dafny) by adding `(setq flycheck-disabled-checkers '(dafny))` to your `.emacs`.

* Entirely by adding `(flycheck-mode -1)` to `'boogie-friends-mode-hook`.

#### Font support

If you see blocks instead of proper characters, or tall characters, or ugly characters:

1. Install a good font and restart Emacs (Arial Unicode, Cambria, Segoe UI Symbol, DejaVu Sans Mono, FreeMono, STIX, Unifont and [Symbola](http://users.teilar.gr/~g1951d/Symbola.zip) should all work).

2. If that doesn't fix it, setup font fallback by adding the following to your `.emacs` (replace `"Symbola"` by the name of your font):
    ```elisp
    (set-fontset-font t 'unicode (font-spec :name "Symbola") nil 'append)
    ```

3. If that still doesn't work, turn of prettification entirely by adding the following to `setup-boogie-friends` above:
    ```elisp
    (prettify-symbols-mode -1)
    ```

If you don't like the way one particular symbol is rendered, you can adjust the font for just that one:

```elisp
(set-fontset-font t (cons ?≔ ?≔) "FreeSerif" nil 'prepend)
```

#### Profiling

A typical profiling workflow proceeds as follows:

1. Open a file for which verification is slow, or times out.
2. Use <kbd>C-c C-t</kbd> to generate a trace (the default timeout is set to 30s; you can customize it by changing `boogie-friends-profiler-timeout`).
3. Use <kbd>C-c C-p</kbd> to profile a function. The slowest method (as determined by the trace) is presented first.
4. Marvel at the intricacies of the axiom profiler.


#### Custom prover configurations

Each time `boogie-friends` calls a prover, it collects arguments from four sources:

* `LANGUAGE-prover-args`, the list of arguments passed to the prover in the default configuration (i.e. `dafny-prover-args` and `boogie-prover-args`). This has pretty good defaults, and probably shouldn't be changed.

* `LANGUAGE-prover-custom-args`, a list of extra flags. This is empty by default, and is a good place to add your own flags.

 `LANGUAGE-prover-local-args`, another list of extra flags. This is empty by default, and is a good place to add per-file or per-directory flags (see below).

* `LANGUAGE-prover-alternate-args`, a list of flags added to the prover invocation when running `verify/compile` with a prefix argument (<kbd>C-u C-c C-c</kbd>). This is a good place to add flags that you do not always need; for example `"/compile:3"` (this is the default).

An example configuration might thus look like this:

```elisp
;; Don't allow assumptions
(setq dafny-prover-custom-args '("/noCheating:1"))

;; Get more debug output when verifying with C-u C-c C-c
(setq dafny-prover-alternate-args '("/proverWarnings:2" "/traceverify" "/z3opt:TRACE=true" "/trace" "/traceTimes" "/tracePOs"))
```

The `LANGUAGE-prover-local-args` is useful if a file requires specific flags (maybe `/vcsMaxKeepGoingSplits`, for example): in that case you can set the `LANGUAGE-prover-local-args` [in just that file](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_node/emacs/Specifying-File-Variables.html) or [in the corresponding directory](http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_node/emacs/Directory-Variables.html).

For example, you can add the following to the top of a file:

```elisp
// -*- dafny-prover-local-args: ("/vcsMaxKeepGoingSplits:5" "/proverMemoryLimit:250") -*-
```

### Acknowledgments

The documentation that ships with this package is auto-generated from the [Dafny Quick Reference](http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/projects/dafny/reference.aspx).

### Pull requests are welcome!

Clone the repo:

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.emacs.d/lisp/ && cd ~/.emacs.d/lisp/
git clone https://github.com/boogie-org/boogie-friends
```

Then in your .emacs (in addition to the stuff above):

```elisp
(add-to-list 'load-path "~/.emacs.d/lisp/boogie-friends/emacs/")
(require 'dafny-mode)
(require 'boogie-mode)
```
